## Digging up the roots: Pendulum shifts across time

The history of western psychology takes us back to its origins: Aristotle's discussion on memory. Aristotle described the principles of contiguity, frequency, and similarity that drive association among events, ideas, or sensations. By these principles, he differed from his predecessor Plato who considered knowledge innate. In the textbook, one may find the evolution of concepts from the 4th century B.C. to modern-day psychology. However, it is worth noting how, across the fields, concepts evolve with the churning of two contradictory ideas. Any extreme tends to polarise the area, spreading similar reflections across societies. It certainly takes a few decades to undo them. E.g., Locke's contradictory views inspired to constitute the right to education for all during the independence of the U.S. 

Another shift in the field came from experimental psychology, which is responsible for building a greater understanding than mere observational studies. Herman Ebbinghaus, considered the first to conduct rigorous studies on human memory, introduced a way to understand how humans retain and forget words. However, another wave of extreme polarisation narrowed the discussions to factual findings regarding observed behavior to regulate theories on the abstract inner mechanisms inside the organism.

Extreme alignment to behaviorism was met by a dead-end when Edward Tolman demonstrated the importance of internal representations using high standards of experimental methods. The scientific enterprise has a deeper understanding of the brain networks capable of explaining the process of learning and the formation of memories. However, which side of the pendulum are we on today? And how close are we to the extreme ends, and what is the major shift that would bring the pendulum back to its central position? Only time will tell!?
